Pre-clinical and clinical evidence suggests that the antidepressant efficacy of the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor escitalopram can be enhanced by the dopamine and serotonin partial agonist aripiprazole. Given the range of possible neurochemical interactions between these drugs, the current study investigated whether aripiprazole alters the hedonic and psychomotor effects of escitalopram. Male Sprague Dawley rats ( n=116) received 10 mg/kg/day escitalopram (subcutaneous), 2 mg/kg/day aripiprazole (subcutaneous), or combined aripiprazole + escitalopram, and were tested for consumption of incentive nutritional stimuli (high-fructose corn syrup and chow), stereotypy and locomotor activity. At the conclusion of behavioral testing, mRNAs of two genes involved in reward processes were quantified: hypothalamic pro-opiomelanocortin and hippocampal brain-derived neurotrophic factor. Escitalopram produced a selective, but temporary, decrease in high fructose corn syrup consumption that was not altered by aripiprazole co-administration. Escitalopram had no significant effect on locomotion, but aripiprazole co-administration produced a persistent increase in stereotypy. Both brain-derived neurotrophic factor and pro-opiomelanocortin mRNA levels were lower in the aripiprazole + escitalopram group relative to the escitalopram group. Taken together, these results suggest that aripiprazole may enhance the antidepressant efficacy of escitalopram through improvement of psychomotor functions. 

[link](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29069975/)


J Psychopharmacol

. 2017 Dec;31(12):1605-1614.
doi: 10.1177/0269881117732515. Epub 2017 Oct 26.
The combination of escitalopram and aripiprazole: Investigation of psychomotor effects in rats
Roger Hudson  1 , Yan Zhou  2 , Francesco Leri  1

### Adjunctive aripiprazole therapy with escitalopram in patients with co-morbid major depressive disorder and alcohol dependence: Clinical and neuroimaging evidence
[link](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4651436/)
The effective treatment of depression has been reported to reduce the severity of alcohol use, potentially reflecting improvements in common brain reward circuits. We hypothesized that augmentation therapy of escitalopram with aripiprazole would improve depressive symptoms as well as reduce craving for alcohol and cue-induced brain activity in patients with co-morbid alcohol dependence and major depressive disorder, compared with treatment with escitalopram alone. Thirty-five subjects with major depressive disorder and alcohol dependence were recruited and randomly assigned into 17 aripiprazole + escitalopram and 18 escitalopram only groups. At baseline and following six weeks of treatment, symptoms of depression, craving for alcohol and brain activity were evaluated. During the six week treatment period, Beck Depression Inventory and clinical global index-severity (CGI-S) scores decreased in both the aripiprazole + escitalopram and escitalopram only groups. In addition, following the treatment period, the Korean alcohol urge questionnaire scores in the aripiprazole + escitalopram group were reduced from 23.3±8.4 to 14.3±4.9, compared with those of the escitalopram group of from 21.6±8.4 to 19.3±7.1 (F=13.1, p<0.01). The activity within the anterior cingulate was increased in response to the presentation of alcohol drinking scenes following treatment in the aripiprazole + escitalopram group. The change of brain activity within the left anterior cingulate gyrus in all patients with co-morbid alcohol dependence and major depressive disorder was negatively correlated with the change in craving for alcohol. These findings suggest that the effects of aripiprazole on anterior cingulate cortex might mediate the successful treatment of alcohol dependence in patients with major depressive disorder.