7 факторов просветления
1. Mindfulness (sati, Sanskrit smrti). To maintain awareness of reality (dharma).
2. Investigation of the nature of reality (dhamma vicaya, Skt. dharmapravicaya).
3. Energy (viriya, Skt. vīrya) also determination, effort
4. Joy or rapture (pīti, Skt. prīti)
5. Relaxation or tranquility (passaddhi, Skt. prashrabdhi) of both body and mind
6. Concentration, (samādhi) a calm, one-pointed state of mind,[1] or clear awareness
7. Equanimity (upekkha, Skt. upekshā). To accept reality as-it-is (yathā-bhuta) without craving or aversion.

[Благородный восьмеричный путь](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Noble_Eightfold_Path)
1. Right View: our actions have consequences, death is not the end, and our actions and beliefs have consequences after death. The Buddha followed and taught a successful path out of this world and the other world (heaven and underworld/hell).[24][25][26][27][note 3] Later on, right view came to explicitly include karma and rebirth, and the importance of the Four Noble Truths, when "insight" became central to Buddhist soteriology.[28][29]
2. Right Resolve or Intention: the giving up of home and adopting the life of a religious mendicant in order to follow the path; this concept aims at peaceful renunciation, into an environment of non-sensuality, non-ill-will (to loving kindness), away from cruelty (to compassion).[30] Such an environment aids contemplation of impermanence, suffering, and non-Self.[30]
3. Right Speech: no lying, no rude speech, no telling one person what another says about him to cause discord or harm their relationship.[23]
4. Right Conduct or Action: refraining from killing, stealing, sexual misconduct
5. Right Livelihood: Gaining one's livelihood by benefiting others also not selling weapons, poisons or intoxicants
6. Right Effort: preventing the arising of unwholesome states, and generating wholesome states, the bojjhagā (seven factors of awakening). This includes indriya-samvara, "guarding the sense-doors", restraint of the sense faculties.[31][30]
7. Right Mindfulness (sati; Satipatthana; Sampajañña): "retention", being mindful of the dhammas ("teachings", "elements") that are beneficial to the Buddhist path.[note 4] In the vipassana movement, sati is interpreted as "bare attention": never be absent minded, being conscious of what one is doing; this encourages the awareness of the impermanence of body, feeling and mind, as well as to experience the five aggregates (skandhas), the five hindrances, the four True Realities and seven factors of awakening.[30]
8. Right samadhi (Passaddhi; Ekaggata; sampasadana): practicing four stages of dhyāna ("meditation"), which includes samadhi proper in the second stage, and reinforces the development of the bojjhagā, culminating into upekkha (equanimity) and mindfulness.[33] In the Theravada tradition and the Vipassana movement, this is interpreted as ekaggata, concentration or one-pointedness of the mind, and supplemented with Vipassana-meditation, which aims at insight.

5 качеств
1. faith or conviction or belief (saddhā)
2. energy or persistence or perseverance (viriya)
3. mindfulness or memory (sati)
4. stillness of the mind (samādhi)
5. wisdom or understanding or comprehension (pañña).

[6 парамит Махаяны](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/P%C4%81ramit%C4%81)
1. Dāna pāramitā (दान पारमिता): generosity, giving of oneself (in Chinese, Korean, and Japanese, 布施波羅蜜; in Tibetan, སྦྱིན་པ sbyin-pa)
2. Śīla pāramitā (शील पारमिता): virtue, morality, discipline, proper conduct (持戒波羅蜜; ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས tshul-khrims)
3. Kṣānti pāramitā (क्षांति पारमिता): patience, tolerance, forbearance, acceptance, endurance (忍辱波羅蜜; བཟོད་པ bzod-pa)
4. Vīrya pāramitā (वीर्य पारमिता): energy, diligence, vigor, effort (精進波羅蜜; བརྩོན་འགྲུས brtson-’grus)
5. Dhyāna pāramitā (ध्यान पारमिता): one-pointed concentration, contemplation (禪定波羅蜜, བསམ་གཏན bsam-gtan)
6. Prajñā pāramitā (प्रज्ञा पारमिता): wisdom, insight (般若波羅蜜; ཤེས་རབ shes-rab)