# определение Куладасы
[**Metacognitive awareness**](%D0%BC%D0%B5%D1%82%D0%B0%D0%BA%D0%BE%D0%B3%D0%BD%D0%B8%D1%82%D0%B8%D0%B2%D0%BD%D0%BE%D0%B5%20%D0%BE%D1%81%D0%BE%D0%B7%D0%BD%D0%B0%D0%B2%D0%B0%D0%BD%D0%B8%D0%B5)**:** metacognitive introspective awareness.

**Metacognitive introspective awareness:** _**Introspective awareness**_ in which the mind “stands back” and observes its own state and activities—an awareness of the mind itself

**Introspective awareness:** _**Awareness**_ of thoughts, feelings, and states and activities of mind.

**Peripheral awareness:** A general cognizance of sensory information; mental objects like thoughts, memories, and feelings; and the overall state and activity of the mind. Any or all of these may be present in peripheral awareness simultaneously. Unlike _**attention**_, which isolates and analyzes specific objects within the _**field of conscious awareness**_, peripheral awareness is inclusive, holistic, and only minimally conceptual. It has more to do with the _relationships_ of objects to each other, and to the whole, and provides the background and overall context for conscious experience—where you are, what’s happening around you, what you’re doing, and why. 

Peripheral awareness is the product of very large numbers of serial processes occurring simultaneously in multiple sensory streams—what is called massively parallel processing. The function of peripheral awareness is to assemble context and search for salience, monitor for flagged issues of importance, and initiate automatic motor responses when appropriate.

\[1\]

J. Yates, M. Immergut, and J. Graves, _The mind illuminated: a complete meditation guide integrating Buddhist wisdom and brain science for greater mindfulness_, First Touchstone trade paperback edition. New York ; London ; Toronto ; Sydney ; New Delhi: Touchstone, 2017.